this video is in part a response to a
debate between cosmic skeptic and Peter
Singer if you have not seen that debate
don't worry you don't need to watch it
to understand the video I'm presenting
right now which is about philosophy
politics and ethics Peter Singer and
cosmic skeptic spend their whole debate
dancing around the question of objective
morality do our ethical values exist as
objective facts are they objective
values that can be measured in the same
way that weight can be measured some
things are heavier than others and the
number in a sense that we assign to
weight is something that objectively
exists in the real world no it's a great
discussion well all right the reason why
we're having the conversation in the
first place is that there is a
widespread misconception that if we
admit something to be merely subjective
it is therefore unreal or less real than
an objective judgment and objective
value right so so wait we're gonna agree
is objective there's an objective
measurement of right wait doesn't matter
if you use pounds or kilograms but
weight is objectively real if you have a
painting how much does the painting way
it's objectively real how much money is
that painting worth it's a subjective
evaluation so we call together a
thousand people we have 1,000 people and
we said we're gonna have an auction
whoever bids the most whoever offers to
pay the most money they don't just get
to buy the painting they actually
determine the value of the painting what
is the price of the painting what is
this painting worth it's established by
an auction that's very common in the art
world in case you didn't know it's not
the only way to establish the value of a
painting say oK we've got a thousand
people here so yeah we're gonna do we're
gonna have a silent auction
everyone's gonna write down on a piece
of paper what they would be willing to
pay for this painting and they're gonna
put that piece of paper in a ballot
it's more like voting now guess what
surprise we decided not to sell the
painting to the highest bidder
we took an average of all the votes we
took an average of what you each wrote
down and said this painting was worth
and we decided that that is a reasonable
price for this painting you can do it is
there a sense in which one price is real
and the other price is false nope
is there a sense in which the price
assigned to the painting can ever be
objectively real in the sense that
weight is objectively real nope what are
you really measuring with the price in
either case if you did the auction tuna
at two different times just six months
apart the value of the painting would be
different because of the people who
attend the auction would be different if
you had the auction in New York City or
you have the option in Paris France for
the same painting the value of the
painting will be different why because
ultimately it's subjective and that's
okay
subjective does not mean unreal
subjective does not mean we can compare
it to something else that objectively
exists and is real no once in a while
this sort of thing matters okay what if
the painting is made at a solid-gold
okay now we have a question what if the
price being paid for this painting is so
cheap that if you melted it down the
gold that it's made out of would be
worth more than the painting okay now
the weight of the painting matters now I
might ask the question how much does
that pay anyway because I may not be
interested in its artistic value I may
be interested in melting it down to get
the solid gold okay there are exceptions
to the rule
my general point is here to come to the
conclusion that something is subjective
does not mean it's unreal and does not
mean that the subjective value the
subjective evaluation is less important
than any possible or
jool objective evaluation so that's why
we're having this discussion in the
first place so where does Peter Singer
take it what is this
this half-wit genius Peter Singer
there's more on who has dragged the name
of veganism through the mud for somebody
where is it dig it
Oh cosmic skeptic challenges him saying
okay when you use the adjective good
what do you really mean do you just mean
good for you you just mean more
pleasurable for yourself or more
pleasant for yourself and Peter Singer
says no we use the adjective good he
means he means good in a sense that
exhibit exists absolutely
in a sense that exists that's
objectively real for whom is something
good if it's objective here's Peter
singers answer this is an old man with
decades in philosophy and a stack of
publications in the bookshelf he says
that something is objectively good is
objectively pleasurable if it is
pleasurable for the whole universe if
it's good for the whole universe if the
universe would be better off with more
of it then it's good that is an answer
just as crude and just as stupid as
saying if it's good for God if it's good
for Moses if it's good for Zeus if it's
good for Indra then it's objectively
good all you're doing is appealing to an
abstract sockpuppet an abstract hand
puppet shall we say that is a stand-in
for your own judgement when Peter Singer
says that something is good for the
whole universe what he means is it's
good in his opinion it's his judgment
but he's holding up this puppet here and
saying no it's not my opinion it's the
universe's opinion it's it's indras
opinion it's Seuss's opinion I have this
friend who's some
of abstraction and according to him
there's a difference between good and
evil doesn't have to do with me
according to him there's a difference in
terms of pleasure in terms of what an
objectively real person would consider a
pleasure versus pain or the sum total of
all people's pleasure it's it's not me
making the judgement it's him all you're
doing is disassociating your own act of
judgment from yourself and pointing to
it as something more objectively real
than you are okay and that's just as
absurd as saying that the value of the
painting consists in its weight it's not
all that interesting to talk about how
unreal moral and ethical values are it's
a very simple short point to make and
I'll use an allegory here it's not
related but you'll see why I use it in
the fullness of time um it's not that
interesting to just kind of prove to
somebody that killing a calf and then
keeping the calf's mother in captivity
so that human beings can drink the milk
that that's kind of bad and evil and
disgusting off that that's really simple
that's a really short easy thing to
prove what's more interesting and more
philosophically weighty and provocative
and important for us to deal with is and
wait a minute how did we end up living
in a society where everyone agrees that
killing a calf and keeping its mother in
captivity and humans drink milk that
that's normal that it's neither good nor
evil that we don't even make the
judgment that the judgment has already
been made for us that that's good and
normal and there's nothing wrong with
and there's nothing even a question
that's philosophically waiting okay now
in the same sense I'm not that
interested here in just pounding on the
point that ethical judgments are
subjective of course they are the value
of the painting is subjective beauteous
in the eye of the beholder how much
you're willing to pay a subjective anon
it goes right what's more interesting
examine is how is it that we live in a
world where the majority of people the
majority of the time lives as if at
and moral values are objective where
that's normal it says normal as people
drinking cow milk and I'm gonna answer
that question I think it's more useful
and I think it illustrates the
underlying simpler question about the
subjective
subjectiveness of moral and ethical
judgments if you have a bunch of people
who come together to play baseball on a
professional diamond a professional
baseball field case you know there were
seats there are lights there are clear
white lines painted around the field
there's a pigeon you can you know the
features this field all these people
have many years of experience with the
rules they come to play baseball they
all have a common sense of fair play
they have a common sense of what is
cheating and what is not cheating they
have a common sense of what's reasonable
or unreasonable even when there's a
problem that may fall into a gray area
outside of the rules or for example a
situation where the umpire wasn't paying
attention and you have to come to some
kind of reasonable accommodation there
there's an ethos there's an ethical
system to baseball that all the
participants are subscribing to it
includes even things like under what
circumstances should the batter run up
and try to punch the pitcher I kid you
not the least back in the 1980s that was
a thing if the pitcher violated certain
rules of decorum and ethics then it was
considered acceptable for the batter to
run up at the at the pitcher's mound try
to punch out the pitcher it was all part
of the game okay so it's possible for
the players in the game for the sake of
the love of the game to all participate
in the same set of subjective moral
standards to such an extent that those
moral standards shared by many people
being obeyed by many people and even
being obeyed by people where it's to
their own personal disadvantage but for
the love of the sport for the love of
the game they do it that gives the
pleasing illusion to all of the
participants that these ethical
standards
are objectively real and many of us live
our lives that way much of the time but
let's say I gather together
of people to play baseball under
slightly different circumstances there
is no baseball diamond there is no first
base no third base
there's no stadium we're on a camping
trip and I say hey guys the 20 of us
we're gonna get together and we're gonna
play baseball in this grassy field now
we start to get some philosophical
questions what is the difference between
a home run and a foul ball back when we
were in the stadium there was a clearly
drawn white line now we just have a
grassy field and there is no white line
we're gonna have to decide in a creative
and dynamic sense what is the difference
between a foul ball and a hit
fair play in the outfield and a home run
we're gonna have said okay you know what
there's a tree over there and there's a
rock maybe we're gonna have to run
around in the forest and get some get
some twigs get some branches and lay
them out to mark some of the features we
are gonna have to decide amongst
ourselves
there is no objectively real line Oh in
that grassy field for us to be
discovered it's not as if there's a
difference between the true demarcation
and a false or misleading demarcation
there is no line to be known accurately
or inaccurately there's only a role for
ourselves as as creative individuals and
ourselves coming together in a
democratic or cooperative way to decide
where we are going to draw the line and
those are the lines that decide our
entire political discourse what is the
difference between a free person and a
slave after the American Civil War
nobody wanted to deal with it they just
had this incredibly vague principle that
you have to quote-unquote enjoy the
fruits of your own labor so will guess
what a whole lot of forms of labor
contracts that came after the American
Civil War looked exactly the same as
slavery
oh it's like well gee it looks like the
difference between slavery and freedom
you guys didn't really
flush out this concept enough what age
is appropriate to allow a human being to
drive a car at what age is it legally
morally or ethically appropriate to
trust you to rent a car maybe
accidentally kill somebody maybe just
accidentally have an accident and smash
up the car is an 18 year old competent
responsible ethically to rent a car is a
16 year old is a 15 year old is a 14
year old do you want to live in a
society where eight-year-old kids can
rent and drive cars
twelve-year-old kids okay if you've been
in some third-world countries you
probably have been in countries where I
have been where there are ten year olds
night rolls driving cars and motorbikes
around trucks - I'm not joking it really
exists you can live in a society like
that okay what what is more of a problem
11 year olds driving cars or drunken
elderly people driving cars good
question hey those are lines that we
draw we draw them in a creative way ex
nihilo
our role is creative what is the
difference between a rose and a
dandelion
there is nothing intrinsic that
distinguishes a flower from a weed we
can decide dandelions should be
eradicated and we should only grow roses
but we can also bring people together
and decide to have a contest at the
county fair for who can grow the most
beautiful bunch of dandelions we instead
of the most beautiful bunch of roses
beauty is in the eye of the beholder
these are lines that we draw and you can
draw them as a creative artist as an
author as a philosopher as a political
commentator as someone engaged in
analysis of what's wrong with your
society and above all else you can draw
those lines dynamically in the course of
being a leader of public opinion a
politician someone in some kind of
democratic creative process trying to
make the world a better place and for me
the most depressing and most boring
thing about Peter singer of all it was
boring thing but this discussion can
peacefully sing our cosmic skeptic is
that there seems to be no tendency
towards drawing conclusions that are
actionable that have to do with getting
out in the real world drawing those
lines and getting people motive
to question the assumptions that they
were born into because we're all in a
situation in the 21st century of having
the luxury of playing baseball on a
professional field were overall in the
situation of not having to question
where should the line be drawn what is
the difference between a foul ball and a
home run because the lines have been
drawn for us and it's so comfortable to
conform it's so easy to just get along
and play the game by the rules that are
only already there and to not question
to what extent this line it's drawn by
me now
I'm agreeing to it or I'm gonna fight to
redraw it in another place where for
some reason it's more or less fair it's
so easy to go to the grocery store and
just accept that there's a packaged
product there on the shelf
cow milk and not question hey you know
what there is neither good nor evil but
thinking makes it so nobody else draws
the line between good and evil but me
it's not Moses it's not Indra it's not
you know for it's not the
judeo-christian god nobody draws the
line but me but hey you know what if I'm
gonna witness the reality of where cow
milk comes from of what it really means
to produce this the ethical consequences
the ecological consequences I have to
decide for myself where to draw the line
nobody ultimately is responsible but me
if we have more people taking that
analytical incisive and ultimately
nihilistic attitude saying I am the
creator and I am the arbiter of these
ethical values I'm the one who has to
come up with a way to entertain twenty
people with just one wooden bat and one
ball okay and I've gotta motivate
everyone to see what I see I'm gonna
motivate these people to look out an
empty grass field with just a tree in a
rock and say there's the line that's
where we're gonna draw the line and now
we're gonna play ball that's the
challenge ultimately of motivating a
group of people as activists to go to
the government and say no
we need seatbelts no we need speed
limits and there's no objectively real
speed limit what the speed limit should
be how high or how low we're going to
decide right now we're going to come
together we're going to debate it and
we're gonna draw a line we're gonna draw
a line between good and evil and we're
gonna punish with fines and prison
sentences people who are on the wrong
side of that line our whole society is
so comfortable with going to the corner
store and seeing that milk as a final
packaged product it's the greatest
ethical tragedy of our time and it
passes unseen before our eyes 365 days
per year